We just learned about
conditional statements
and how they can
be developed to allow computers
to make decisions.
But sometimes we need
our programs to simply
count or perform a task
over and over again.
When it comes to tasks
that are tedious,
it's normal for humans to
lose focus and energy.
It's in situations
like these where
computers can be
especially helpful.
In this video, we'll
examine how computers can
perform repetitive tasks
using iterative statements.
An iterative statement is code
that repeatedly executes
a set of instructions.
Iterative statements are
also referred to as "loops."
Setting up a loop allows
us to repeatedly use
a line of code without having
to type it multiple times.
Before discussing the syntax,
let's run a loop so you can
experience what happens.
Notice how this code printed
all the numbers in the list
with only one print
statement. That's a loop.
There are two types of
loops we'll explore:
for loops and while loops.
We just ran a for loop, and we'll
continue to focus on
them in this video.
Later, we'll explore
while loops.
for loops repeat code for
a specified sequence.
An example of this
would be using a
for loop to print
every item in a list.
For loops begin with
the keyword for.
for signals the
beginning of a for loop.
Similar to conditional
statements,
iterative statements
consist of two main parts.
The parts of a loop are
the loop header
and the loop body.
Let's examine the
for loop we just
ran and use that to
explore these parts.
The loop header is the
line that contains
the for keyword and
ends with a colon.
It tells Python to start a loop.
It consists of the for keyword,
a loop variable,
and the sequence the loop
will iterate through.
The loop variable is
a variable that is
used to control the
iterations of a loop.
The loop variable comes
directly after for.
A common name for
it is the letter i,
but you can give it any
other name you want.
In for loops, this
temporary variable is only
used within the loop and not
outside of it in the
rest of the code.
The loop variable is followed by
the in operator and
the sequence the loop
will iterate through.
In this example,
this sequence is
a list containing numbers
from one through four.
It runs each of these numbers
through a specified action.
We need to remember
to put a colon at
the end of the loop header
to introduce this code.
The loop body refers to
the indented lines
after the loop header.
This represent the actions that
are repeated while
the loop iterates.
In this case, it will print
each number in the list:
first one, and then
two, and so on.
Another important use of for
loops is to repeat
a specific process
a set number of times.
This is done through combining
it with the range function.
The range function generates
a sequence of numbers.
As an example, range from
zero to 10 sets a sequence
that goes from zero,
one, two all the way up
until the number nine.
When we use range,
we start counting at the
number in the first position;
in this case, zero.
Then when we reach the number
in the second position,
it tells us where to stop.
That number is excluded.
In this case, where
the number is 10,
the sequence only
goes up until nine.
An important detail
about the range function
is that if we don't
provide a start point,
it automatically
starts from zero.
10 represents the stop point.
Since the stop
point is excluded,
the numbers included in
the sequence start at
zero and end at nine.
A sequence that starts
at zero and ends at
nine will iterate 10 times.
Let's run a for loop that
incorporates the range function.
We'll use range to ask Python to
repeat an action 10 times.
Then we'll indicate the
action we want to repeat.
This action is printing
an error message that
indicates "cannot connect
to the destination."
Let's run this. Using
a for loop with
the range function
allowed us to repeat
the same error message 10 times,
instead of typing it over
and over again ourselves.
In this video, we learned
about the syntax
and structure of
iterative statements and worked
with for loops as an example.
In the next video, we'll
cover another type
of iterative statement:
the while loop.